Adding migration guide for 2.6 cluster wide (#172)
openshift-service-mesh/sail-operator: docs/ossm/ossm2-migration/cluster-wide/README.md

# OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 Cluster wide --> 3 Migration guide
This guide is for users who are currently running `ClusterWide` OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 migrating to OpenShift Service Mesh 3.0. You should first read [this document comparing OpenShift Service Mesh 2 vs. OpenShift Service Mesh 3](../../ossm2-vs-ossm3.md) to familiarize yourself with the concepts between the two versions and the differences in managing the workloads and addons.

## Migrating OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 Cluster wide to OpenShift Service Mesh 3

### Prerequisites

> - you have completed all the steps from the [pre-migration checklist](../README.md#pre-migration-checklist)

Reviewer: Maybe flip these two steps - read OSSM 2 vs 3, then run the premigration check list. They will have more context to start this way.

- you have read [OpenShift Service Mesh 2 vs. OpenShift Service Mesh 3](../../ossm2-vs-ossm3.md)
- you have verified that your 2.6 `ServiceMeshControlPlane` is using `ClusterWide` mode
- Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator is installed
- `IstioCNI` is installed
- `istioctl` is installed

### Procedure
In this example, we'll be using the [bookinfo demo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Maistra/istio/maistra-2.6/samples/bookinfo/platform/kube/bookinfo.yaml) but you can follow these same steps with your own workloads.

#### Plan the migration
There will be two cluster wide Istio control planes running during the migration process so it's necessary to plan the migration steps in advance in order to avoid possible conflicts between the two control planes.

> There is a few conditions which must be assured to achieve the seamless migration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a few conditions which must be assured to achieve the seamless migration:
```

> - both control planes must share the same root certificate

Reviewer: Can this be validated somehow? If so, I think there should be a step for that.

>   This can be achieved simply by installing the 3.0 control plane to the same namespace as 2.6 control plane

Author: I added those steps to the migration procedure. It seems to be better place as this chapter is called "Plan the migration" and no resources are created here.

- 3.0 control plane must have access to all namespaces in 2.6 mesh

>   At some point during the migration, some proxies will be already controlled by the 3.0 control plane and some still controlled by the 2.6 control plane. To assure the communication still works, both control planes must be aware of the same set of services. You have to verify that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  At some points during the migration, some proxies will be controlled by the 3.0 control plane and some will still controlled by the 2.6 control plane. To assure the communication still works, both control planes must be aware of the same set of services. You must verify that:
```

>   1. there are no Network Policies blocking the traffic

Reviewer: How can this be checked?

Author: There will be new chapter for network policy migration which should explain what is expected so I added a TODO to add a link it here once it's ready.

>   1. if used, `discoverySelectors`  defined in 3.0 `Istio` include all namespaces from 2.6 mesh. See [Scoping the service mesh with DiscoverySelectors](../../create-mesh/README.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. Ensure that the `discoverySelectors` defined in your OpenShift Service Mesh 3.0 `Istio` resource will match the namespaces that make up your OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 mesh. You may need to add additional labels onto your OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 application namespaces to ensure that they are captured by your OpenShift Service Mesh 3.0 `Istio` `discoverySelectors`. See [Scoping the service mesh with DiscoverySelectors](../../create-mesh/README.md)
```

- only one control plane will try to inject a side car

>   This can be achieved by correct use of injection labels. Please see [Installing the Sidecar](../../injection/README.md) for details.

Reviewer: At the risk of potentially duplicating content, I think it might be good to show some examples here on what injection labels should look like to ensure that only one control plane will inject the sidecars. Perhaps even an example of what NOT to do?

Author: The problematic moments are highlighted by Notes and CAUTION notes. So I think we are safe here. Users will never hit this problem of two control planes injecting the sidecar unless they skip the highlighted sections bellow.

Author: At the end I divided the migration chapters based on the label usage which will be much better for clarity

  > **_NOTE:_** To disable 2.6 injector, we will use `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label in this guide.

Apart from the conditions above, it's recommended to decide which injection labels will be used. See [Installing the Sidecar](../../injection/README.md) explaining relation between Istio revisions and injection labels. Based on the decision, use correct injection labels later in this guide.

#### Create your Istio resource

> See Installation documentation for details.

Reviewer: I think it's good to show a more full example here, including creation of the `Istio` resource, as you mentioned some requirements above like it needs to be in the name namespace as the OSSM 2 control plane, and the discovery selectors should match the namespaces of the OSSM 2 meshes. So, as this is a pretty big procedure, I think this could be a more complete end to end example.

Author: I added back the Istio CR creation part. Just to avoid confusion, is this the final decision to keep it there? Asking because it was removed due to previous review comment: "rather than giving specific instructions to create a new Istio resource here, we could direct them to the OSSM installation instructions, which covers discoverySelectors."

Reviewer: Yes, sorry for the back and forth... I guess after seeing it, it's better to include it.

  1. there are no Network Policies blocking the traffic

     OpenShift Service Mesh 3.0 is no longer managing Network Policies and it's up to users to assure that existing Network Policies are not blocking the traffic for OpenShift Service Mesh 3.0 components. See Migration of Network Policies documentation for details.
     <!--TODO: add a link when the doc is ready https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSSM-8520-->
  1. Ensure that the `discoverySelectors` defined in your OpenShift Service Mesh 3.0 `Istio` resource will match the namespaces that make up your OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 mesh. You may need to add additional labels onto your OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 application namespaces to ensure that they are captured by your OpenShift Service Mesh 3.0 `Istio` `discoverySelectors`. See [Scoping the service mesh with DiscoverySelectors](../../create-mesh/README.md)
- only one control plane will try to inject a side car

  This can be achieved by correct use of injection labels. Please see [Installing the Sidecar](../../injection/README.md) for details.

>   > **_NOTE:_** Due to a known issue in OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 it's necessary to disable 2.6 injector when migrating the data plane namespace. We will use `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label in this guide.

Author: Used "specific behavior" instead of bug :)

1. Update injection labels on the data plane namespace

    Here we're adding two labels to the namespace:

    1. The `istio.io/rev=ossm-3` label which ensures that any new pods that get created in that namespace will connect to the 3.0 proxy. In our example, the 3.0 revision is named `ossm-3`
    2. The `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label which will disable sidecar injection for 2.6 proxies in the namespace. This ensures that 2.6 will stop injecting proxies in this namespace and any new proxies will be injected by the 3.0 control plane. Without this, the 2.6 injection webhook will try to inject the pod and it will connect to the 2.6 proxy as well as refuse to start since it will have the 2.6 cni annotation.

        > **_NOTE:_** that once you apply the `maistra.io/ignore-namespace` label, any new pod that gets created in the namespace will be connected to the 3.0 proxy. Workloads will still be able to communicate with each other though regardless of which control plane they are connected to.

    ```sh

>     oc label ns bookinfo istio.io/rev=ossm-3 maistra.io/ignore-namespace="true" --overwrite=true

Reviewer 2: > maistra.io/ignore-namespace="true"

I don't think you need this label. Clusterwide does not have the same problem as MultiTenant where the istiod cannot do discovery in the namespace if the namespace is removed from the SMMR because ClusterWide always does discovery in all namespaces (unless you limit with discovery selectors) regardless of what is in the SMMR.

You _do_ need to remove the `istio-injection: enabled` label though if you are using this for 2.6 and you are using `istio.io/rev` for 3.0 since `istio-injection: enabled` seems to take precedence over `istio.io/rev`. For cluster wide, we can remove the namespace from the SMMR and the proxies will continue to communicate with one another. I'm not sure which scenario we want to base the example off of but here's an updated example that adds the `istio.io/rev` label and removes the `istio-injection` label which effectively removes the namespace from the SMMR.

```suggestion
    oc label ns bookinfo istio.io/rev=ossm-3 istio-injection- --overwrite=true
```

Author: Right, I also thought about this option. It will work fine for scenarios without `istio-injection` label but it would complicate a lot scenarios where customers are using `istio-injection` label in 2.6 and want to continue using it for 3.0. 
Reasons I decided to use `maistra.io/ignore-namespace="true"`:

- to avoid at least 3 different migration scenarios for customers who a) have `istio-injection` label in 2.6 and want to continue using it for 3.0, b) have `istio-injection` label in 2.6 and don't want to use it in 3.0 and c) customers without `istio-injection` label in 2.6.
- sceario a) would be much more complicated compared to what we have now with `maistra.io/ignore-namespace="true"` e.g. changing `spec.memberSelectors` in SMMR, re-labeling namespaces. I have not tested this scenario without `maistra.io/ignore-namespace="true"` so I'm not even sure if it's possible.
- using `maistra.io/ignore-namespace="true"` will work for all 3 scenarios
- multitenant and clusterwide migration steps will be similar

Reviewer 2: > a) have istio-injection label in 2.6 and want to continue using it for 3.0

The default for cluster wide seems to use `istio-injection` so I'm guessing this will be the most common scenario.

> b) have istio-injection label in 2.6 and don't want to use it in 3.0

In this case you have to remove `istio-injection` before the 3.0 controlplane will inject a sidecar. Even if the `maistra.io/ignore-namespace` label is present and the 2.6 controlplane doesn't inject, if the `istio-injection` label is present then the revisioned 3.0 controlplane won't inject the sidecar either.

> a) would be much more complicated compared to what we have now with maistra.io/ignore-namespace="true" e.g. changing spec.memberSelectors in SMMR, re-labeling namespaces. I have not tested this scenario without maistra.io/ignore-namespace="true" so I'm not even sure if it's possible.

I agree I think you'll need `maistra.io/ignore-namepsace` here so that only the 3.0 controlplane does injection.

> c) customers without istio-injection label in 2.6.

This is the easiest scenario since it's just a normal canary upgrade at that point and all you need to do is update `istio.io/rev`.

Reviewer 2: I don't think one approach will work for all 3 scenarios because you'll need to perform different steps for each.

>  b) have istio-injection label in 2.6 and don't want to use it in 3.0 

For this scenario you'll have to remove the `istio-injection` label regardless of whether or not you use `maistra.io/ignore-namespace`. Whereas for scenario a) you don't want to remove `istio-injection`.

Reviewer 2: To be sure, I tested scenario b) where my namespace is this:
```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  labels:
    istio-injection: enabled
    istio.io/rev: ossm-3
    maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"
    maistra.io/member-of: istio-system
  name: bookinfo
```
and I restarted my `reviews-v2` workload and now the pod has no sidecar at all:
```
reviews-v2-69c6fcfd69-qjb2p       1/1     Running   0          22s
```
because with `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` 2.6 won't inject and since the `istio-injection: enabled` label is present the revisioned 3.0 controlplane won't inject either.

Author: Ah, I know what you mean now. I thought that removal of `istio-injection`  label in case b) would be implicit. As switching from `istio-injection` to `istio.io/rev` will also include the removal. Current doc is showing scenario c) which is probably not the best one to show. Thank you.

### Procedure
In this example, we'll be using the [bookinfo demo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Maistra/istio/maistra-2.6/samples/bookinfo/platform/kube/bookinfo.yaml) but you can follow these same steps with your own workloads.

#### Plan the migration
There will be two cluster wide Istio control planes running during the migration process so it's necessary to plan the migration steps in advance in order to avoid possible conflicts between the two control planes.

There are a few conditions which must be verified to ensure a successful migration:
- both control planes must share the same root certificate

  This can be achieved by installing the 3.0 control plane to the same namespace as 2.6 control plane. The migration procedure below shows how to verify the root cert is shared.
- 3.0 control plane must have access to all namespaces in 2.6 mesh

  During the migration, some proxies will be controlled by the 3.0 control plane while others will still be controlled by the 2.6 control plane. To assure the communication still works, both control planes must be aware of the same set of services. You must verify that:
  1. there are no Network Policies blocking the traffic

>      OpenShift Service Mesh 3.0 is no longer managing Network Policies and it's up to users to assure that existing Network Policies are not blocking the traffic for OpenShift Service Mesh 3.0 components. See Migration of Network Policies documentation for details.

Reviewer: "No network policies blocking traffic" makes sense, but I am a not clear on the next sentence. Are we saying users should migrate network policies to OSSM 3 before doing the migration? Could that cause problems migrating traffic?

The pre-condition of "no network policies to block traffic" during the migration seems like it may be a separate issue from "I want network policies in OSSM 3 that does the same thing that the OSSM 2 generated network policies did". The pre-migration checklist already covered that network policy management should be disabled...if the user is going to re-introduce network policies for OSSM 3, should that be done before the migration or afterwards?

Author: Yes, before the migration the 2.6 feature for NP management must be disabled. Users are free to decide if they will re-create the NP manually or not. It's also up to them if it's done before or after the migration. The important part is that newly created NP must not block the traffic for either of the control planes if done before. If done after, users only care about 3.0 control plane. I tried to expand this part.

     <!--TODO: add a link when the doc is ready https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSSM-8520-->
  1. Ensure that the `discoverySelectors` defined in your OpenShift Service Mesh 3.0 `Istio` resource will match the namespaces that make up your OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 mesh. You may need to add additional labels onto your OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 application namespaces to ensure that they are captured by your OpenShift Service Mesh 3.0 `Istio` `discoverySelectors`. See [Scoping the service mesh with DiscoverySelectors](../../create-mesh/README.md)
- only one control plane will try to inject a side car

  This can be achieved by correct use of injection labels. Please see [Installing the Sidecar](../../injection/README.md) for details.
  > **_NOTE:_** Due to specific behavior of OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 it's necessary to disable 2.6 injector when migrating the data plane namespace. We will use `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label in this guide.

> Apart from the conditions above, it's necessary to decide which injection labels will be used. See [Installing the Sidecar](../../injection/README.md) explaining relation between Istio revisions and injection labels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the conditions above, for OpenShift Service Mesh 3.0, you must decide whether to want to use the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` labels to configure sidecar injection. See [Installing the Sidecar](../../injection/README.md) for a full explanation of the two labels for configuring sidecar injection.
```

> Once it's clear how the `istio.io/rev` and `istio-injection` labels work in OpenShift Service Mesh 3, it's also necessary to revisit your OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 installation and understand consequences of different injection configurations. Typically, following configurations might be used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Going back to your OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 installation, the way member selection was configured in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` may impact the choice of injection labels used with OpenShift Service Mesh 3.0:
```

    Here we're adding two and removing one label:

    1. The `istio.io/rev=ossm-3-v1-24-1` label ensures that 3.0 proxy will be injected to any new or restarted pods in that namespace. In our example, the 3.0 revision is named `ossm-3-v1-24-1`
    1. The `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label ensures that 2.6 control plane will stop injecting proxies in this namespace to avoid conflicts between 2.6 and 3.0 side car injectors.
    1. Because we can't create the `default` `IstioRevisionTag` yet. It's necessary to temporarily remove the `istio-injection=enabled` as it would prevent the proxy injection by 3.0 control plane as the `istio-injection` label takes precedence over `istio.io/rev` label.

    ```sh
    oc label ns bookinfo istio.io/rev=ossm-3-v1-24-1 maistra.io/ignore-namespace="true" istio-injection- --overwrite=true
    ```

1. Migrate workloads

    You can now restart the workloads so that the new pods will be injected with the 3.0 proxy.

    This can be done all at once:

    ```sh
    oc rollout restart deployments -n bookinfo
    ```
    or individually:
    ```sh
    oc rollout restart deployments productpage-v1 -n bookinfo
    ```

> 1. Validation of the workloads can be done the same way as in the previous procedures

Reviewer 3: To clarify: is the validation step for workloads in the previous procedure:

Verify that new `istiod` is using existing root certificate:
    ```sh
    oc logs deployments/istiod-ossm-3-v1-24-1 -n istio-system | grep 'Load signing key and cert from existing secret'
    2024-12-18T08:13:53.788959Z	info	pkica	Load signing key and cert from existing secret istio-system/istio-ca-secret
    
Or is it this:

 Ensure that expected workloads are managed by the new control plane via `istioctl ps -n bookinfo`

    In case you have restarted just `productpage-v1`, you will see that only `productpage` proxy is upgraded and connected to the new control plane:

Author: Yes, validation is done via `istioctl ps -n bookinfo`

> **_NOTE:_** Even with different versions of the proxies, the communication between services should work normally.

##### Create a default revision tag and re-label namespaces
1. Prepare a default revision tag yaml named `rev-tag.yaml`:
    ```yaml
    apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1alpha1
    kind: IstioRevisionTag
    metadata:
      name: default
    spec:
      targetRef:
        kind: IstioRevision
        name: ossm-3-v1-24-1
    ```
1. Apply the `rev-tag.yaml`:
    ```sh
    oc apply -f rev-tag.yaml
    ```
1. Verify `IstioRevisionTag` status:
    ```sh
    oc get istiorevisiontags
    NAME      STATUS                    IN USE   REVISION        AGE
    default   NotReferencedByAnything   False    ossm-3-v1-24-1  18s
    ```
1. Add `istio-injection=enabled` and remove `istio.io/rev` label:
    ```sh
    oc label ns bookinfo istio-injection=enabled istio.io/rev-
    ```
1. Restart the workloads:
    ```sh
    oc rollout restart deployments -n bookinfo
    ```
1. Verify the `IstioRevisionTag` is in use:
    ```sh
    oc get istiorevisiontags
    NAME      STATUS    IN USE   REVISION        AGE
    default   Healthy   True     ossm-3-v1-24-1  28s
    ```

> 1. Validation of the workloads can be done the same way as in the previous procedures

Reviewer 3: To clarify: is the validation step for workloads in the previous procedure:

Verify that new `istiod` is using existing root certificate:
    ```sh
    oc logs deployments/istiod-ossm-3-v1-24-1 -n istio-system | grep 'Load signing key and cert from existing secret'
    2024-12-18T08:13:53.788959Z	info	pkica	Load signing key and cert from existing secret istio-system/istio-ca-secret
    
Or is it this:

 Ensure that expected workloads are managed by the new control plane via `istioctl ps -n bookinfo`

    In case you have restarted just `productpage-v1`, you will see that only `productpage` proxy is upgraded and connected to the new control plane:

Author: Yes, validation is done via `istioctl ps -n bookinfo`

> 1. Repeat steps 4. and 5. for other namespaces

Reviewer 3: Each step starts with 1. so to clarify, are these steps 4 and 5:

Add `istio-injection=enabled` and remove `istio.io/rev` label:
    ```sh
    oc label ns bookinfo istio-injection=enabled istio.io/rev-
    ```
Restart the workloads:
    ```sh
    oc rollout restart deployments -n bookinfo

Author: Yes

## Migrating OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 Cluster wide to OpenShift Service Mesh 3

### Prerequisites
- you have read [OpenShift Service Mesh 2 vs. OpenShift Service Mesh 3](../../ossm2-vs-ossm3.md)
- you have completed all the steps from the [pre-migration checklist](../README.md#pre-migration-checklist)
- you have verified that your 2.6 `ServiceMeshControlPlane` is using `ClusterWide` mode
- Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator is installed
- `IstioCNI` is installed
- `istioctl` is installed

### Procedure
In this example, we'll be using the [bookinfo demo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Maistra/istio/maistra-2.6/samples/bookinfo/platform/kube/bookinfo.yaml) but you can follow these same steps with your own workloads.

#### Plan the migration
There will be two cluster wide Istio control planes running during the migration process so it's necessary to plan the migration steps in advance in order to avoid possible conflicts between the two control planes.

There are a few conditions which must be verified to ensure a successful migration:
- both control planes must share the same root certificate

>   This can be achieved simply by installing the 3.0 control plane to the same namespace as 2.6 control plane. The migration procedure below shows how to verify the root cert is shared.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This can be achieved by installing the 3.0 control plane to the same namespace as 2.6 control plane. The migration procedure below shows how to verify the root cert is shared.
```
Nitpick - good to avoid using "simple" or "simply" in documentation to describe steps.

    With this configuration, you will be able to keep the `istio-injection=enabled` on your data plane namespaces during the migration.
- `spec.memberSelectors` in your `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` is not configured to match `istio-injection=enabled` and your 2.6 data plane namespaces are using some other label

    With this configuration, it will be necessary to add either the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` label during the migration. The label defined in the `spec.memberSelectors` in your `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` will have no effect on injection in OpenShift Service Mesh 3
- [adding projects using label selectors](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/service_mesh/v2x/ossm-create-mesh.html#ossm-about-adding-projects-using-label-selectors_ossm-create-mesh) feature is not used at all and all projects were added to the mesh manually by creating `ServiceMeshMember`

    With this configuration, it will be necessary to add either the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` label during the migration.

> Based on your 2.6 configuration listed above, you should follow one of the procedures bellow.

Reviewer: I must admit, reading the above, I'm not clear on which procedure to choose, and the scenario in which the 3rd path would cause down time. It looks like the options are:
1. I am using `istio.io/rev` labels, and want to use a revision based upgrade procedure and to continue using `istio.io/rev` labels.
2. I am using `istio-injection=enabled` labels and want to use a revision based upgrade procedure to ensure zero downtime, but then want to move back to just using `istio-injection=enabled` labels.
3. I am using `istio-injection=enabled`, and don't want to use`istio.io/rev` labels as part of the upgrade procedure. It says that this creates traffic disruption risk, but it's not clear how that risk occurs.

Author: I will expand this section.

     version: v1.24.1
   ```
1. Apply the `Istio` resource yaml:

    ```sh
    oc apply -f ossm-3.yaml
    ```
1. Verify that new `istiod` is using existing root certificate:

    ```sh
    oc logs deployments/istiod-ossm-3-v1-24-1 -n istio-system | grep 'Load signing key and cert from existing secret'
    2024-12-18T08:13:53.788959Z	info	pkica	Load signing key and cert from existing secret istio-system/istio-ca-secret
    ```
##### Migrate Workloads
1. Apply correct labels to the data plane namespace

    Here we're adding two and removing one label:

    1. The `istio.io/rev=ossm-3-v1-24-1` label which ensures that any new pods that get created in that namespace will connect to the 3.0 proxy. In our example, the 3.0 revision is named `ossm-3-v1-24-1`
    1. The `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label which will disable sidecar injection for 2.6 proxies in the namespace. This ensures that 2.6 will stop injecting proxies in this namespace and any new proxies will be injected by the 3.0 control plane.
    1. It's necessary to temporarily remove the `istio-injection=enabled` as it would prevent the proxy injection by 3.0 control plane.

    ```sh

>     oc label ns bookinfo istio.io/rev=ossm-3-v1-24-1 maistra.io/ignore-namespace="true" istio-injection- --overwrite=true

Reviewer: Can the `maistra.io/ignore-namespace="true"` label be removed after the migration is complete? Question applies to multi-tenant as well. cc @nrfox

Author: It can be removed only after the OSSM 2.6 control planes are removed.

Author: We should probably include this to cleaning 2.6 chapter.

Author: Done in https://github.com/openshift-service-mesh/sail-operator/pull/202

    ```

1. Migrate workloads

    You can now restart the workloads so that the new pods will be injected with the 3.0 proxy.

    This can be done all at once:

    ```sh
    oc rollout restart deployments -n bookinfo
    ```
    or individually:
    ```sh
    oc rollout restart deployments productpage-v1 -n bookinfo
    ```

> 1. Validation of the workloads can be done the same way as in the previous procedures

Reviewer 3: To clarify: users can verify the migration of workloads by verifying that new `istiod` is using existing root certificate, since that is the previous procedure. Is this correct?

And when do users want to follow these steps for migrating workloads instead of the steps for migrating workloads that start on line 107?

        name: ossm-3-v1-24-1
    ```
1. Apply the `rev-tag.yaml`:
    ```sh
    oc apply -f rev-tag.yaml
    ```
1. Verify `IstioRevisionTag` status:
    ```sh
    oc get istiorevisiontags
    NAME      STATUS                    IN USE   REVISION        AGE
    default   NotReferencedByAnything   False    ossm-3-v1-24-1  18s
    ```
1. Add `istio-injection=enabled` and remove `istio.io/rev` label:
    ```sh
    oc label ns bookinfo istio-injection=enabled istio.io/rev-
    ```
1. Restart the workloads:
    ```sh
    oc rollout restart deployments -n bookinfo
    ```
1. Verify the `IstioRevisionTag` is in use:
    ```sh
    oc get istiorevisiontags
    NAME      STATUS    IN USE   REVISION        AGE
    default   Healthy   True     ossm-3-v1-24-1  28s
    ```
1. Validation of the workloads can be done the same way as in the previous procedures
1. Repeat steps 4. and 5. for other namespaces

#### Simple migration of 2.6 installation with istio-injection=enabled label
It is recommended to use one of the procedures above in production environments.
In this procedure it's expected that all 2.6 data plane namespaces have `istio-injection=enabled` label.
> [!CAUTION]

> > This procedure may cause a traffic disruption for workloads which are restarted at unexpected time.

Reviewer: Can you expand on the scenario(s) that may cause traffic disruption here?

Author: It's explained in the note bellow when applying the Istio resource yaml. I will add more info here too.

   ```
1. Apply the `Istio` resource yaml:

    > **_NOTE:_** after next step, both 2.6 and 3.0 control planes will try to inject side cars to all pods in namespaces with the `istio-injection=enabled` label and all pods with the `sidecar.istio.io/inject="true"` label after next restart of the workloads. Workloads should be restarted only after the `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label is added (see below).
    ```sh
    oc apply -f ossm-3.yaml
    ```
1. Verify that new `istiod` is using existing root certificate:

    ```sh
    oc logs deployments/istiod -n istio-system | grep 'Load signing key and cert from existing secret'
    2024-12-18T08:13:53.788959Z	info	pkica	Load signing key and cert from existing secret istio-system/istio-ca-secret
    ```
##### Migrate Workloads
1. Add `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label to the data plane namespace

    The `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label will disable sidecar injection for 2.6 proxies in the namespace. This ensures that 2.6 will stop injecting proxies in this namespace and any new proxies will be injected by the 3.0 control plane. Without this, there will be a conflict and the proxy will not start.

>       > **_NOTE:_** that once you apply the `maistra.io/ignore-namespace` label, any new pod that gets created in the namespace will be connected to the 3.0 proxy. Workloads will still be able to communicate with each other though regardless of which control plane they are connected to.

Reviewer: I'm not clear on this... in the earlier procedures, it was said that the `maistra.io/ignore-namespace` label ensured "that 2.6 will stop injecting proxies in this namespace and any new proxies will be injected by the 3.0 control plane", but here it says that it ensures that "any new pod that gets created in the namespace will be connected to the 3.0 proxy", which sounds a bit different. 

The sentence after - "Workloads will still be able to communicate with each other though regardless of which control plane they are connected to.", makes me wonder what the risk with this procedure is?

Author: Both are true, 2.6 control plane will not try to inject any new or restarted pods in that namespace. So restarted and any new pods will be injected by 3.0 control plane.

The problem can occur only during the time when you already have new Istio cr created but `maistra.io/ignore-namespace` label is not yet set. In this period, if you restart the workloads there will be injection conflict.

I will try to reword this.

    productpage-v1-db9bfdbd4-z5c2l.bookinfo        Kubernetes     SYNCED (9s)      SYNCED (9s)      SYNCED (4s)     SYNCED (9s)      IGNORED     istiod-797bb4d78f-xpchx            1.24.1
    ratings-v1-7684d8d8b8-xzrc6.bookinfo           Kubernetes     SYNCED (12s)     SYNCED (12s)     SYNCED (4s)     SYNCED (12s)     IGNORED     istiod-797bb4d78f-xpchx            1.24.1
    reviews-v1-fb4d48bd8-lzvtx.bookinfo            Kubernetes     SYNCED (12s)     SYNCED (12s)     SYNCED (4s)     SYNCED (12s)     IGNORED     istiod-797bb4d78f-xpchx            1.24.1
    reviews-v2-58bcc78ff6-fcrb8.bookinfo           Kubernetes     SYNCED (11s)     SYNCED (11s)     SYNCED (4s)     SYNCED (11s)     IGNORED     istiod-797bb4d78f-xpchx            1.24.1
    reviews-v3-5d56c9c79b-l6gms.bookinfo           Kubernetes     SYNCED (11s)     SYNCED (11s)     SYNCED (4s)     SYNCED (11s)     IGNORED     istiod-797bb4d78f-xpchx            1.24.1
    ```
You can now proceed with the migration of next namespace.

  > **_NOTE:_** Even with different versions of the proxies, the communication between services should work normally.

> #### Remove 2.6 control plane

Reviewer: Is there any difference in removal between multi-tenant and cluster-wide? If not, perhaps this can be a separate page on its own (so as not to duplicate).

Author: There will be some minor differences but it should be possible to have some general steps which will work for both. I will remove the cleaning section from here and it will be done in https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSSM-8511

- Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh 3 operator is installed
- `IstioCNI` is installed
- `istioctl` is installed

### Procedure
In this example, we'll be using the [bookinfo demo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Maistra/istio/maistra-2.6/samples/bookinfo/platform/kube/bookinfo.yaml) but you can follow these same steps with your own workloads.

TODO: should we add a note about `minReplicas` for workload deployments?
TODO: include also ingress gateway deployment migration?

#### Plan the migration
There will be two cluster wide Istio control planes running during the migration process so it's necessary to plan the migration steps in advance in order to avoid possible conflicts between the two control planes.

There is a few conditions which must be assured to achieve the seamless migration:
- both control planes must share the same root certificate

  This can be achieved simply by installing the 3.0 control plane to the same namespace as 2.6 control plane
- both control planes have access to all migrated namespaces and namespaces running addons (e.g. otel collector)
  1. verify there are no Network Policies blocking the traffic

>   1. `discoverySelectors`  defined in 3.0 `Istio` resource must match migrated namespaces. See [Scoping the service mesh with DiscoverySelectors](../../create-mesh/README.md)

Reviewer 2: Is this only applicable if you are running multiple controlplanes in cluster wide mode?

Author: I think I need to update this so it clearer. What I mean by this is: if you decide to use discovery selectors for 3.0, you have to assure, that 3.0 control plane will have access to all 2.6 namespaces which you want to migrate - so 3.0 control plane internal service registry is the same as 2.6 internal service registry

- only one control plane will try to inject a side car

To achieve last condition, it's necessary to understand how the injection works. Please see [Installing the Sidecar](../../injection/README.md) for details.
> [!CAUTION]
> In case you decide to use a `default` name for 3.0 `Istio` resource with `InPlace` upgrade strategy, 3.0 control plane will try to inject side cars to all pods in namespaces with `istio-injection=enabled` label and all pods with `sidecar.istio.io/inject="true"` label after next restart of the workloads. Without using `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label, it will result in a conflict with 2.6 control plane injector.

> In case you are using `istio-injection=enabled` label on your data plane namespaces and planning to keep it, you should first read revision tag documentation. TODO: add link. TODO: describe cases where the migration will work with `istio-injection=enabled` (default revision, default revision tag)

Reviewer 2: I think we should steer people as far away as possible from any scenario where an injection conflict will occur. Either by telling users to **not** name their `Istio` resource `default` and/or by only using `istio.io/rev`. In any case, users will likely need to relabel all of their dataplane namespaces? Either by adding `maistra.io/ignore-namespace` or by removing `istio-injection=enabled` in favor of `istio.io/rev`. The instructions could be more prescriptive and tell the user "do this" and "don't do this".

I prefer we tell users not to use the `default` name. And we have them label all their namespaces at once with `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"`. If they want to keep `istio-injection=enabled`, then they should create a `RevisionTag`.

Author: If we tell users not to use `default` name, it would make the migration guide simpler for sure. But I'm not sure if we can do that as it's a valid use case. e.g. 2.6 users with `istio-injection=enabled` used everywhere who want to do a simple migration "all at once" would just:

#### Install OpenShift Service Mesh 3

1. Create your `Istio` resource.

>     Here we are not using any `discoverySelectors` so the control plane will have access to all namespaces. In case you want to define `discoverySelectors`, keep in mind that all data plane namespaces you are planning to migrate must be matched.

Reviewer 2: I don't think you need to keep mentioning `discoverySelectors`. Or else it can be a separate guide? Having a guide that is dedicated to single tenant cluster wide could help keep it more focused.

Reviewer: I also wonder too, if, rather than giving specific instructions to create a new Istio resource here, we could direct them to the OSSM installation instructions, which covers discoverySelectors. I notice that the `IstioCNI` resource being installed is a pre-req, but that is only discussed in the main installation page.  Or, as we have the running OSSM 2 and OSSM 3 side by side instructions, if we could direct people toward those and then use that as the starting point? Just trying to reduce duplication...

Author: The goal of mentioning `discoverySelectors` here is to avoid situations where users incorrectly define `discoverySelectors` which will prevent access to some 2.6 namespaces which they plan to migrate. It would cause a problem where 3.0 internal service registry would be different from 2.6 internal service registry meaning that some communication would break during the migration. This problem should be mentioned in this migration guide very clearly I believe as it's not obvious.

   spec:
     namespace: istio-system
     version: v1.23.2
   ```

#### Migrate Workloads

1. Update injection labels on the data plane namespace.

    Here we're adding two labels to the namespace:

    1. The `istio.io/rev: ossm-3` label which ensures that any new pods that get created in that namespace will connect to the 3.0 proxy.
    2. The `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label which will disable sidecar injection for 2.6 proxies in the namespace. This ensures that 2.6 will stop injecting proxies in this namespace and any new proxies will be injected by the 3.0 control plane. Without this, the 2.6 injection webhook will try to inject the pod and it will connect to the 2.6 proxy as well as refuse to start since it will have the 2.6 cni annotation.

    > [!NOTE]
    > that once you apply the `maistra.io/ignore-namespace` label, any new pod that gets created in the namespace will be connected to the 3.0 proxy. Workloads will still be able to communicate with each other though regardless of which control plane they are connected to.

    ```sh
    oc label ns bookinfo istio.io/rev=ossm-3 maistra.io/ignore-namespace="true" --overwrite=true
    ```
    > [!IMPORTANT]

>     > In case you are using `istio-injection=enabled` label on the namespace being migrated, remove that label via `oc label ns bookinfo istio-injection-` or add a default revision tag. TODO: add more when the revision tag doc is ready

Reviewer 2: If you are using `istio-injection=enabled` you wouldn't need to add `istio.io/rev` at all if you had a revision tag deployed.

What's the desired end state? Users have `istio-injection=enabled` label or `istio.io/rev` label? Or is it just user preference and they can use either one? If users want to keep `istio-injection=enabled`, we may need to have separate instructions here depending on which injection label they want.

Author: Agree, this is confusing and mixing two different scenarios. Adding separated instructions for `istio-injection=enabled` and `istio.io/rev` will be clearer.

1. Prepare the `Istio` resource yaml named `ossm-3.yaml` to be deployed to the same namespace as the 2.6 control plane:

    Here we are not using any `discoverySelectors` so the control plane will have access to all namespaces. In case you want to define `discoverySelectors`, keep in mind that all data plane namespaces you are planning to migrate from 2.6 must be matched.

    ```yaml
   apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1alpha1
   kind: Istio
   metadata:
     name: ossm-3 # the name, updateStrategy and version are significant for injection labels
   spec:
     updateStrategy:
       type: RevisionBased
     namespace: istio-system # 3.0 and 2.6 control planes must run in the same namespace
     version: v1.24.1
   ```
1. Apply the `Istio` resource yaml:

    ```sh
    oc apply -f ossm-3.yaml
    ```
1. Verify that new `istiod` is using existing root certificate:

    ```sh
    oc logs deployments/istiod-ossm-3-v1-24-1 -n istio-system | grep 'Load signing key and cert from existing secret'
    2024-12-18T08:13:53.788959Z	info	pkica	Load signing key and cert from existing secret istio-system/istio-ca-secret
    ```

##### Migrate Workloads

> This procedure is not using revision tags but it's recommended to use them for big meshes to avoid re-labeling of namespaces during future 3.y.z upgrades.

Reviewer 2: Also if they want to keep using `istio-injection: enabled` label after the migration they'll need to create a revision tag.

Reviewer 2: Nevermind this is covered below by the next scenario. Is the only difference between the first two scenarios the creation of the istio rev tag after? Maybe we can consolidate the two scenarios then and have an optional section if you want to keep using `istio-injection: enabled` where the istio rev tag is created?

1. Prepare the `Istio` resource yaml named `ossm-3.yaml` to be deployed to the same namespace as the 2.6 control plane:

    Here we are not using any `discoverySelectors` so the control plane will have access to all namespaces. In case you want to define `discoverySelectors`, keep in mind that all data plane namespaces you are planning to migrate from 2.6 must be matched.
    

>     Also note that `default` name with `InPlace` update strategy is used which allows usage of the `istio-injection=enabled` label. In case you want to use different name or `RevisionBased` update strategy, you will have to configure `default` `IstioRevisionTag`.

Reviewer 2: Is naming the `Istio` "default" and using the `InPlace` strategy the only way to do this upgrade path?

>     Also note that `default` name with `InPlace` update strategy is used which allows usage of the `istio-injection=enabled` label. In case you want to use different name or `RevisionBased` update strategy, you will have to configure `default` `IstioRevisionTag`.

Author: I think it should work also with the default tag.

>     Also note that `default` name with `InPlace` update strategy is used which allows usage of the `istio-injection=enabled` label. In case you want to use different name or `RevisionBased` update strategy, you will have to configure `default` `IstioRevisionTag`.

Author: I'm not sure about usage of the `default` name because it is:

- a counterpart of the default installation of the upstream istio
- the simplest upgrade path which might be first option for many customers who are looking for simplicity

I agree we should somehow pushing customers to use more advanced configuration which will make the upgrade safer but I'm not sure if we should hide the simple options. Maybe we can add a note recommending usage of revision tags with revision based upgrade strategy?

>     Also note that `default` name with `InPlace` update strategy is used which allows usage of the `istio-injection=enabled` label. In case you want to use different name or `RevisionBased` update strategy, you will have to configure `default` `IstioRevisionTag`.

Author: > I'm also not sure what happens when you create an InPlace with the name default and you create a default tag

You should never need the default revision tag in this case.

>     Also note that `default` name with `InPlace` update strategy is used which allows usage of the `istio-injection=enabled` label. In case you want to use different name or `RevisionBased` update strategy, you will have to configure `default` `IstioRevisionTag`.

Reviewer 2: > I agree we should somehow push customers to use more advanced configuration which will make the upgrade safer but I'm not sure if we should hide the simple options. Maybe we can add a note recommending usage of revision tags with revision based upgrade strategy?

How about changing the order of the upgrade options? Right now the "simple" option is first and the "advanced" is last. We can list the "advanced" option first and list the "simple" option last. Also rather than calling it "advanced" it can just be "Migration of 2.6 installation with istio-injection=enabled label" and we can label the "simple" option as "simple" and keep the warning it has saying that this option is simpler but it is less safe than the others and can result in downtime if the workloads get restarted before you add the `maistra.io/ignore-namespace` label.

>     Also note that `default` name with `InPlace` update strategy is used which allows usage of the `istio-injection=enabled` label. In case you want to use different name or `RevisionBased` update strategy, you will have to configure `default` `IstioRevisionTag`.

Reviewer 2: Unless we _want_ users to have a default revision tag? If the operator ever creates this automatically then there will be conflicts between the two webhooks.

>     Also note that `default` name with `InPlace` update strategy is used which allows usage of the `istio-injection=enabled` label. In case you want to use different name or `RevisionBased` update strategy, you will have to configure `default` `IstioRevisionTag`.

Author: The simple option is now last one and it also contains recommendation to use previous options.
